the ethos of
managerialism has
supplanted the rule of law as the basic
idea instead of the rule of law we have
rule by law now which means that the law
is nothing more than a tool that's I
agile government it means the
legislature is not taking on its role of
making the rules and the the executive
branch has taken over making the rules
applying the rules and enforcing the
rules all on its own and that that is
not the way the Western legal system
used to
[Music]
work hello everybody I have the
opportunity today to speak with two
guests Constantine kizen who is co-host
of the podast trigonometry in the UK
popular podcast he is a speaker and a
thinker who deals with cultureal war
issues mostly political uh in so far as
the cultural War issues are political my
other guest is Bruce party Bruce is
a professor at Queens University
professor of law at Queens University in
Canada um recently the Trudeau
woke mob has managed to extend
themselves even further into
the legal Netherlands with a new bill
called
C63 which isn't law in Canada yet but is
soon likely to be and it is the most
totalitarian
Western Bill I've ever seen by quite a
large margin and in multiple dimensions
and that was
my conclusion upon reading it and then
my conclusion upon rereading it and
rereading it again because I like to
make sure I have these things right and
I I thought I'd talk to Bruce about it
today along with Constantine to see if
my understanding of the bill is actually
correct with regard to Constantine how
he sees what's happening in Canada
reflected in say Scotland and in Ireland
in particular in the UK but also in in
England and uh well that's the terrain
we
exploring so join us it'll be quite a
ride so Dr party I think we got in touch
with each other again most recently
because I was um obsessing neurotically
about a new Canadian Bill
C63 which seemed to me to be a real
Masterpiece
of right-thinking
utopian resentful foolishness and I
thought it would be real useful to talk
to you about that to make sure that I
understood it and uh but I thought I'd
start our discussion or we could start a
discussion today by going back into the
past eight
years into the legal domain in Canada to
discuss bill c16 because that's now
eight years ago and and in in in some
ways the bill that was at the origin of
the current rat current Rat's Nest of
pathological IC legislation in Canada
and so do you want to bring everybody up
to date just to begin with OR remind
them or educate them about what bill c16
was and what the fears were at the time
and whether or not those have been
realized yes sure thanks Jordan well c16
is when you and I met um and you were
concerned as I was and as others were
not very many others mind you but a few
others concerned that these proposed
amendments to the Canadian Human Rights
Act the inclusion of gender identity and
gender
expression would have an effect upon
speech essentially to require people to
use the preferred pronouns of other
people and frankly uh The Establishment
types poo pooed the idea and called us
uh fear fearmongers and of course that's
turned out to be entirely untrue you
were exactly right in your concerns
that kind of amendment had been made
before in provincial human rights codes
but this was the the federal version but
that's in there now and we have all
kinds of pronoun trouble but the present
bill that you're referred to
C63 is c16 on
steroids it's got three categories of
bad in it uh one's an administrative bad
one is a criminal code bad criminal law
bad and the other one is again like c16
um a Canadian Human Rights Act Amendment
so let me do the last one first and so
what's the purported purpose purported
well the purported purpose it it starts
with the
cover of protecting children right from
online harm that's the first
administrative BL who could possibly
oppose that this is this is part of the
beauty of the way they go about these
things it's got great cover and nobody
in their right mind would want to come
out and say well that's not a bad that's
that's not a good idea
M but what that kind of cover enables is
basically a a Crackdown on the very idea
of free speech so let's just take the
the human rights aspect first they are
returning to the Canadian Human Rights
Act an old an old section that got
thrown out got got repealed during the
era of Steven Harper when Harper was the
Prime Minister and it was causing all
kinds of nuisance it was the kind of
section and other these kinds of
sections also appear in the provincial
codes every Province and the federal
government has their own Human Rights
Code and these codes not all of them but
but typically include this kind of of
restriction on speech you're not allowed
to
discriminate in your speech is what some
of them say and this this section
basically says that if you are if you
use hateful speech that can be taken to
vilify an individual or group then you
will be acting discriminatorily and
therefore in breach of the code and
therefore potentially liable to any of
the perceived victims and also
potentially to the government itself and
the one of the problems with the human
rights regime is that complaints can be
made very very easily without a lawyer
without any cost so and because the
Canadian federal government has
jurisdiction over the
Internet this section is going to
authorize complaints of all kinds to be
made against people who are speaking
Their Minds online about any and
everything so it's going to have a a
chilling effect upon speech no question
about it you put that together with the
criminal code amendments those criminal
code amendments make
it well they do several things here's
one extraordinary thing that it does
it makes the sentence the maximum
sentence for
any violation of an offense like any
offense any offense in the criminal code
or under Federal legislation any offense
that is motivated by hatred will carry a
maximum sentence of life imprisonment
right now the Defenders of the bill say
well don't worry the the judge isn't
actually going to give you life
that's not likely to happen and that may
be true but that's not the point if you
don't mean it in legislation then don't
give the judge the power if it's in the
law it's likely to happen if it's in the
law it is going to happen sooner or
later and it it is a signal about what
is lawful and what is not and what the
proper punishment should be and what is
not so uh
C63 is is a reflection of
how just just one more reflection of how
we have we are losing the law we are
losing in C63 the idea of free speech
itself you know that old quote that
people always refer to uh from Volt's
biographer the one that goes I disagree
with what you say but I'll defend to the
death you're right to say I think the
reason that that quote is trotted out so
often is that when you come write down
to it most people don't agree with that
every everybody says they believe in
free speech everybody Justin Trudeau has
said he believes in free speech there's
a guarantee of free speech in the
Chinese Constitution right right okay
it's very easy to say and what they
really mean is yes I believe in free
speech but yeah and it's within the butt
whether you can find out whether or not
they really do believe in free speech so
for my money we shouldn't
have a law that prohibits hate speech
yeah hate speech is ugly but but people
hate each other and if they're not
allowed to say that they do well then
their speech is not free so it's also a
very difficult and challenging thing to
make an emotion
illegal so no doubt and of course the
definition of what they mean by hate
speech we get is I mean it's it's
impossible to tell and it's going to be
under the preview of the judge to decide
in any particular case whether or not
you've cross that threshold okay so let
let's let's talk about the devil in the
detail because the angel lurking over
all of this
is fundamentally we're protecting
children from being exploited online
okay so well there are children and they
are exploited online and they deserve
protection so that's all and and
good what steps are taken in the bill to
actually protect children who being
exploited online and then how do we
segue from that to hate like cuz those
aren't the same Universe these there
there as I say there are three bits in
the bill and they're they're in the same
bill but they're they're distinct so
there's the human rights aspect there's
the criminal code aspect and then this
third aspect which is primarily one that
a that's aimed at the protecting kids is
an administrative
regime that gives an an agency the power
essentially to supervise the online
platforms but it also gives them the
power to make the rules so we don't even
know what the rules are going to be
basically it just gives the whole
control of the thing to to a government
agency to the bureaucrats to do as they
think best in the name establishing an
entirely new bureaucracy exactly yes
with an unspecified range of Power with
an non-specific purview that purports to
protect children from online
exploitation but but has the possibility
of turning into a policing policing
State for the for for the internet per
se and this is often how the
administrative work administrative State
works right so this agency will not be
policing uh citizens themselves directly
but they'll be policing the online
platforms and the platforms will will
thereby censor the people who are using
them so it's a it's a we're we're not
doing it we're a hands off we're we're
two steps removed situation but in in
effect it is the government pulling the
strings of the okay so to what degree do
you think that even the setup of that
new administrative bureaucracy which has
very extensive powers and very poorly
defined Powers as far as I could tell
when I read the bill yes how much of
that do you think is actually devoted
genuinely I know this is a judgment call
obviously but you have to infer that
from the legislation
right if the legislation was honest and
well written it would very specifically
target the target of it
purported um reason for existence yes
right if it if if it was designed for
example to produce a more General regime
for online
policing is to me that's what it looks
like and if so is that a consequence of
poor legislative design is it a
consequence of intent like what do you
think's going on there well it's what's
going on there is what's been going on
inside our law with respect to
empowering the administrative state for
a long long time right so standard
legislation now at either the federal or
provincial level is authorizing
legislation meaning you pass a bill
about a certain subject and it might
contain some rules in it but it also
contains the authority the delegation of
authority to the bureaucrats to an
agency of some kind to the minister or
to whoever to a to a Human Rights
Commission to make policies or
guidelines or regulations about certain
things and you can't tell by reading the
statute what the rulle
are and and so you've you've transferred
legislative Authority essentially from
the legislature to the to the
bureaucracy and and this is not this is
not the this is not the bureaucracy
stealing it this is the legislature
giving it because they don't want the
responsibility of doing it and they
don't and they don't want to have to go
through the minutia of figuring out what
the right rules are so they just they
just shove it off into the back
rooms and this is the way the
administrator State works now it's a
it's if I can stay it's a kind of
collusion between the legislature and
the courts so the courts okay we have
these three branches of the government
yes we have the legislature we have the
courts and we have the administrative
State and you know the division between
them is cleanest in the American version
of things but we in Canada and the UK we
have them as well and the legislature
and the courts are together supposed to
be supervising with the executive branch
the administrative state is doing
because the general rule is supposed to
be the administration which used to be
the King after all can't do anything
that's not authorized by the legislature
okay so these three things are checks
and balances on each other yeah but now
they're all on the same page and the
courts and the legislature are convinced
about the need for this
expansive overwhelming administrative
State and so instead of supervising the
administrative branch and the courts
instead of making sure that they stick
within their
powers the legislator is delegating to
it and the courts are deferring to it
and so what we end up with and the
legislators don't have to take
responsibil exactly in any in either way
because we don't and we we can't find
who's responsible anymore yeah right
it's it's all sort of a mystery it's a
it's a moving ball it's it's and this is
this is the way administrative agencies
and government departments and
Ministries can be quote agile they want
to be agile they want to be able to
respond to societal problems quickly
right well if you're able to respond
quickly that means you have the
legislative power in your hands and that
nobody else knows exactly what's going
on until it happens and sometimes not
until after the fact even right so that
principle of the rule of law that said
the rule applies to
everybody both the ruled and the
ruler if you have an agile government
making rules up as they go along well
that means by definition the rules can't
apply to them because they have the
power to change them whenever they want
to and and so we have agile governments
who are managing us managing Society
solving social problems we are in a
managerial era in the law management I I
would put it this way management the the
ethos of
managerialism has
supplanted the rule of of law as the
basic idea instead of the rule of law we
have rule by law now which means that
the law is nothing more than a tool for
the government to use to
create at at on a
whim uh whenever they need it to make
you do this and there was no better
example of all of this than during Co
you had people standing behind
microphones on a Tuesday afternoon
saying well the rule tomorrow is going
to be this that it's iile government it
means the legislature is not taking on
its role of making the rules and the the
executive branch has taken over making
the rules applying the rules and
enforcing the rules all on its own and
that that is not the way the Western
legal system used to work we have
managerialism instead of the rule of
law
Constantine is there anything so far in
in Bruce's discuss
that triggered any Echoes about similar
situations in the UK well there's a
couple of pieces that I I would pick up
on that I think are relevant uh and the
first one is what you mentioned about
the fact that the bill is quite
expansive yet only a small part of it
appears to be dealing with the core
issue which is the protection of
children we had the online harms bill
which was ostensibly about the same
thing but in its original drafting
included all sorts of uh other things
completely unrelated to any of that and
it's not a surprise because what we have
seen uh over and over in the UK is that
quite often the attempt to protect
people from hate or whatever has
actually nothing to do with the trigger
the causes so give you an example sir
David Ames was an MP who was murdered by
a
terrorist uh and the next day all his
colleagues went into Parliament and
started talking in Parliament about how
this shows that we need to tackle online
hate David ases wasn't killed by online
hate he was killed by an islamist um
likewise more recently Parliament
actually to to cut a very long story
short suspended its own rules of
procedure because uh labor party MPS
feared what would happen to them if they
did not vote the correct way on the
Israel Palestine conversation and again
following the Ferrari that broke out
from that the argument was well MPS need
to be nicer to each other in of dealing
with the fact that there was a mob
outside Parliament who was intimidating
the parliamentarians so very often the
it seems to me that uh a lot of the time
the mind has been made up that we need
to deal with online hay whatever that
means and then whatever happens is then
used as an excuse to do that secondly
that's got to be kind of in the nature
of of I think how tyranny unfolds in the
real world it's it's something like
there's a pre-commitment to a set of
ideological axioms and then whatever
crisis comes along is just assimilated
to that and used as a shoehorn to move
it forward and
so has there ever been a tyranny that's
emerged spontaneously that didn't
present itself to begin with as
fostering security and improving Civic
health or public health for that matter
the Nazis were you improving Public
Health like mad throughout the 1930s I
mean some of that public health
Improvement was genuine there's a fair
bit of it that wasn't but but the cover
story was really solid right and it was
often compassion even with their the
whole
Nazi the catastrophic Nazi Nazi policies
of Youth in Asia that culminated in the
Holocaust began with the language of
compassion right so well quite and
actually the the thing that really
revealed to me how much of this is
ideological was I was on a British
program called question time which
you've been on um and what they do is
they have a panel of guests uh and
before the main show starts they do one
question for discussion that is a
warm-up that's not recorded so people
are a little bit more loose in that part
of it and the question at the time was
um Donald Trump has just been unbanned
from Facebook you know was this the
right thing to do whatever and you know
they came to me I made the deeply
controversial point that I think the
president of the most powerful country
in the world should be allowed to speak
in public this didn't go down well but
what happened afterwards they went to
the leftwing politician on the panel uh
the labor politician on the panel you
know and she she without missing a beat
when they went to her she went we must
have the safest internet in the world
and to a round of applause and what that
signaled to me I think gentlemen is that
we have completely lost the battle over
the way the conversation is being in
being able and willing to say some harm
is a consequence of freedom and that's a
price that we're willing to pay and I
believe that until we get the
conversation onto that footing we're
never going to win this argument because
if the argument is about well we must
make people safe then that will always
necessitate more tyranny by default of
course and so it's I I see certainly in
the UK I wouldn't speak for Canada or
the United States a complete failure of
quote unquote our side to make make that
argument that we are willing to
sacrifice some whatever safety means in
the context of words and that's a whole
bunch of BS in my opinion
anyway whatever that means that has a
price and there comes a point where too
much safety means too much giving up or
freedom and we're not prepared to do
that we haven't been able to make that
argument I I agree with you and I think
I think one of the problems is that we
approach that argument from the wrong
end and what I mean by that is
you I think we should start with the
presumption that any you're allowed to
say anything you want like anything you
want now what might the exceptions to
that be well here's one if I go up to
somebody on the sidewalk and say give me
your wallet or I'll stab you okay well
that crosses a line because now I'm
threatening imminent violence that's a
that's a that's an assault and it's okay
for us to say no that's not allowed
because it's violence but
if you start from that end then you can
saywell what are are there any other
exceptions and maybe yes and maybe no if
you start at the harm end I mean there's
all kinds of harm you do just by
speaking that's in ways that are clearly
anything anything serious anything
serious serious if you if you're
campaigning to be elected to something
then you are trying you are trying to do
harm to your opponent you want to make
them lose or if you are if you are
running a commercial Enterprise and you
want to outsell your your neighboring
competitor you're trying to do them harm
and if you succeed you will do them harm
maybe they go out a business that's
legit you are allowed to cause people
harm by your speech harm is not is not
something that's prohibited we have to
we have to get back to the idea that we
live in the world and people succeed and
they fail and sometimes they fail
because of what other people do and too
bad because they're free it's it's a
free world in a free world you are going
to be hurt by other people too bad
having a VPN you trust is extremely
important I can confidently say that
expressvpn is the best VPN on the market
and here's why expressvpn doesn't log
your online activity many cheap or free
vpns make money by selling your data to
advertisers but expressvpn doesn't do
this they even develop the technology
trusted server that makes their VPN
servers incapable of storing any data at
all expressvpn now also uses light way a
new VPN protocol engineered to speed up
user speeds we've tried many vpns in the
past and they can sometimes slow your
connection but expressvpn is always
blazing fast lets me stream videos in HD
quality with zero buffering at all plus
I love how easy it is to use all you got
to do is fire up the app and tap one
button to connect it's not just me
saying this either CNET The Verge and
many other Tech journals raid expressvpn
is the number one VPN in the world so
protect yourself with the VPN that I use
and Trust visit expressvpn / jordant
toay and get an extra 3 months free on a
one-year package expressvpn.com Jordan
that's expressvpn.com Jordan to learn
more so let's go back here now to
why how we get
from protecting children against online
exploitation which apparently
necessitates as you pointed out the
construction of a very IL defined
expensive and highly autonomous new
administrative system not bound if I
remember correctly by normal Rules of
Evidence well so yeah so well number one
that's absolutely true in the
administrative realm but it's also true
in the human rights realm right so these
commissions and tribunals I sat on a
Tribunal for a while yeah they they
there they look like sort of Courts yeah
if you go into the room it looks like
it's set up like a courtroom you got a
Bend and somebody making a decision and
Witnesses and so on but they're not
courts because well for various reasons
they're created by governments first of
all they're basically are part of the
executive branch of government even
though they look like a court but they
don't adhere to normal Rules of Evidence
right um and to what extent they do on
any particular occasion might vary it
depends upon the rules of that
particular tribunal so you know people
have called them kangaroo courts
sometimes that's that's deserved um but
it's it's part of the trend of taking
decisions away from courts and giving
them to the executive branch of
government but mind you the courts
haven't been all that good in recent
years either you know as I've been
saying we are losing the law let me put
it this way um we we've been talking
you've been talking especially for a
long time about how
institutions in society have been
compromised been taken over by wokeism
by Social Justice by critical theory so
on well the law is an institution it's
one of these social institutions one of
these public institutions there's no
reason why the law should be immune from
all those all those factors as any other
institution like government like
universities like public schools like
media it's happening to the law too it's
happening now don't get me wrong in
Canada we have
um some terrific judges and we have
cases that go the way they're supposed
to and they're they're heard the way
they're supposed to with the proper
Rules of Evidence and the proper
analysis and so this is not a black and
white thing but more and more you are
seeing from the courts evidence that the
Paradigm has changed or is changing from
what a lot of people think in their
heads is the way the laws should work to
what actually is the case now and and
what's the case now so let me give you
an example yeah so we have a section in
our Charter that says that everybody is
equal under the law they're entitled to
equal protection under the law which is
what the US Constitution says as
well but over the past 40 Years of
Charter jurist Prudence by the Supreme
Court of
Canada that section now means that
people are not entitled to equal
protection that is equal treatment by by
the law they're entitled to equal or
equivalent
outcomes between groups right so let me
give you an example of the perhaps the
most recent important Supreme Court of
Canada case on this
idea many years ago the RCMP created a
job sharing plan wherein full-time
members could combine with two or three
other members to decide to work
part-time was voluntary people who
worked part-time if you want to work
part-time and you're working full-time
then we're going to allow you to do that
and we're going to give you a pension as
well and the pension if your part-time
will be calculated in the same way that
the pension is calculated for the
full-time people which is proportionate
to the hours that you work okay
voluntary over time what
happens more women than men voluntarily
sign up yeah for the part-time work
right of course and then at the end of
the day that means that more women than
men have lower pensions than the men who
are working full-time yeah the program
is challenged under Section 151 of the
charter Supreme Court of Canada says
unconstitutional by definition by
definition you can't have a voluntary
equal program that results in different
results for women than men it's a little
hard on the whole notion of voluntary
there isn't it exactly equal rules
voluntary program Open to everybody
treats everybody the same way not
constitutional oh boy when was that
ruling uh 2019 I believe oh yeah that's
a rough one okay so how did we get from
protecting vulnerable children from
online sexual exploitation with a
gigantic unnamed bureaucracy with
indefinite rights and virtually no
responsibility to whatever the hell
hateful speech is I mean first of all we
might ask ourselves Constantine you can
weigh in here too is like the whole
notion of hateful speech that's
Troublesome one for me because there's a
obvious element of subjective judgment
in it like a clearly obvious one and the
problem for me is always as soon as
someone talks about hateful speech isn't
so much whether or not there are forms
of speech they're detestable because you
haven't lived if you haven't listened to
somebody say something
detestable perhaps sometimes in justest
which is a very interesting you know
variation of that possibility but like
who decides that it's hateful on what
grounds like and why do you decide the
people who are making that judgment and
then that problem is very much Amplified
like very much Amplified if you open the
door as this bill does to Anon Anonymous
denunciations sure right now everybody
including every school child who's like
older than three and maybe even at three
understands that there's almost nothing
worse than a snitch and all children are
wise enough to know that even if you are
being bullied at school let's
say it has to get pretty damn brutal and
bad before going to report it to the
authorities is acceptable or justifiable
now you know you can debate about the
conditions under which that should or
shouldn't occur my point is that even
kids know
that even under dire circumstances
there's almost nothing worse than a
snitch and yet these bills and we
certainly know from places like the
Soviet Union just exactly what happens
or East Germany what happens when
onethird of the citizens which was the
case in East Germany become government
informers it's like trusts gone the
worst people have the upper hand it's
complete bloody catastrophe now in Bill
C63 you have a Conant of these problems
like okay now you now hate speech is
going to be uh constrained and it can be
identified by Anonymous informants okay
so let's delve into that a little bit if
I got that right first well yes but
let's just back up to your your children
point right so so part of the problem is
the premise and and and the premise is
widely accepted because we accept this
Prem premise generally now in society
because this is where we're at but the
premise is that the government is
responsible for keeping people safe
including the children and that's
ignoring the best mechanism we already
have to keep children safe which is
their parents right it's assuming that
this is what this state is for if you
went up to somebody on the street
anybody at random and you said you know
do you think we should have an expansive
administrative State and by that I mean
you know all these government people who
do all these things they probably look
at you like I don't know what you're
talking about that's what government is
that's what government's for what what
do you mean what what does government do
other than solve problems for society by
making these rules and and and and and
doing policy and so on and we've lost
the the proposition that we've made a
choice to have this large overwhelming
government tell us what to do in place
of all of the other things we used to
have individual decisions families
communities churches all of the
nonpublic institutions and I mean
government
institutions government just rules the
day now and we're debating about whether
or not the government has done this job
properly or not well well the problem is
the government's doing the job the
government for my money shouldn't be in
this business business they shouldn't be
in the business of regulating speech for
hateful impact why not uh be be well
because if we think we live in a free
country if the government's in this
business then we're
wrong so so your point is something like
that the the cost of the cost of having
the government offer all potential
Services say in relationship to desire
and safety is that you lose all your
autonomy and your freedom well let's
let's let's back up what what rights
should we have is where we should start
what rights do you have if you're a free
person what does that
mean I think it means that other people
can't coers you can't interfere with you
you know can't take your stuff can't use
Force against you that means you're free
that means other people can't do it it
means the state can't do it that's the
the sphere of Freedom that you have that
means that the government needs to do
one job which is to make sure other
people don't coerce you and use Force
against you and take your
stuff job
done if somebody says something you
don't like and causes you psychological
angst too bad the person is free and so
are you put up with it as part of the
world as soon as you get governments
oversteep thing that zone that I just
described you you you start to move away
from that conception of Freedom into a
different kind of society altogether and
we are so far along that path that that
I don't I don't know how we can call
ourselves a free country a free people
with a straight face it's
just 63 C certainly is one of the pieces
of legislation that make you question
that oh absolutely but but Bill 6 Bill
C63 is is just One Step along the way
and and we so let's go back to the
courts because part of the fault of C63
it's a government bill so it's
legislative problem but but the courts
the Supreme Court of Canada already said
essentially that this kind of
restriction on speech is
constitutional and in fact in C63
they've used some of the language the
Supreme Court of Canada said was
okay so the Supreme Court of Canada took
this Charter we have which says
everybody has the right to free speech
and said well sure everyone has the
right to free speech but not this well
they used that against me of course they
did yeah yeah a direct beneficiary of
that line of reasoning I have freedom of
speech but it's subject to
reasonable limitations and and what are
those well there whatever any reasonably
constituted bureaucracy deem they might
be that's basically what me but that
makes that makes a mockery of the whole
idea of having a constitutional yeah of
course yeah I think that was kind of the
point this is the point the point is
that our Charter people think of our
Charter of Rights as the beginning of as
the
foundation of our legal system and it's
not it's a mere
gloss on legislative Supremacy and now
judicial Supremacy because the court can
decide what those rights mean however it
wants yeah and more and more they are
less robust individual rights and more
and more justifications for the
administrative state to do things in the
public good so people are putting much
too much Faith weight on the fact that
we have a charter they think it works in
the same way as the American Bill of
Rights which has fared much better over
time than ours has it's much older as
well of course uh but but and and much
more foundational well yes but even in
the so even in the US though I think
we've all made a mistake in the Anglo
World we've made a mistake and it's a a
very very old mistake to go back even to
the time of the magnar so the original
problem was the
king and the King depending upon the
king of course but kings were tyrants
their their word was the law and then
over time with great difficulty Magna
Carta and then the Civil Rights Act of
1688 and and the American um Declaration
of Independence and so on over time what
we did was take power away from the King
and give it to the legislature and
that's good right because the the the
Monarch is hereditary and the
legislature is elected so power to the
people great except that over time
legislator showed that they can be
tyrants
to C63 and all kinds of other things
that have happened Through the Ages and
so the American first came along and
said we're going to try and fix that too
so they created a Bill of Rights which
limits what legislatur can do but to do
that they had to give power to the
courts so from the King to legislature
from legislature to courts and now the
courts are screwing it up and the courts
are giving power back to the
administrative state which is the king
so here's the mistake we
made we've been just moving power around
from King to legislator legislature to
courts to administrative State we've
moving it around from place to place
instead of taking power
away and if you take power how about how
about instead of adopting responsibility
for the problem is that in order for
that to work and in order for the rule
of law to work the people in power have
to adhere to the idea so the rule of law
works for for quite a while like there
are some periods when it was great yeah
right so the rule of law is a restraint
on people with power on legislators on
executive branch and even on courts and
as long as the people who who who who
occupy those positions believe in the
idea it
works but our people in those positions
do not believe in the idea anymore they
just they they have thrown the idea out
because it prevents them from doing what
they think their job now is which is to
manage stuff MH because management
requires requires agility it requires
responsiveness it requires you to get in
there and muck about with your hands and
that is not the way the rule of law
works the rule of law is this idea that
the legislature makes these Grand rules
based upon important principles that
defines the relationship between State
and individual and we can all tell what
it is we can all go read what they are
it's in the book the law is there for
everybody to know that is not the way it
works now now the law is just for the
people in power to control and
understand and and issue by edict
whenever it suits them to make sure that
the little people are doing what they're
supposed to do so the rule of law is in
direct conflict with what all our rulers
think their job now is well there's no
glory and virtue to be obtained in
applying the law that someone else
passed right exactly sir but coming back
to your point Jordan as well about who
decides what hate speech is I mean we
have this in the UK where uh for certain
offenses the the evidence that a i the
language is are well but a
non-crime hate incident which is when
you haven't committed any crime but
nonetheless this will be recorded by the
police on your record and potentially
used against you in employment
interviews and so on um is based on your
self-perception of what motivated your
uh offender who Afflicted you in some
way to do what they did so if I if you
were to make some sort of joke at my
expense and I concluded that it was to
do with my immigration status or
ethnicity or whatever I could then say
well this is clearly a hate incident
that you've right and and the rationale
for that would be well who would know
better than the person who was directly
affected and who's to question that then
the victim we might say well and the
answer to that if you have any sense is
well
what if the purported victim is a
manipulative psychopath and the general
response to that is well those all those
people are just victims
too right and so well so this this this
will get us back into the hate
discussion how do you define hate well
you just said you allow the purported
target of the hate to Define it and what
they do is they say that they feel
hated so it's a second order form of
evidence the primary evidence in
principle is their subjective emotion
but you don't have access to that so you
have to accept their record of their
subjective emotion and you accept that
in a manner that isn't questionable
there's no higher authority than than
their say so and the problem with that
it's this it's a variant of the problem
with the informants is that only works
well it would never work let's get that
clear yeah but that only works in the
ideal situation
where people have perfect understanding
of the motivation of others which they
don't and also they're not
lying the problem with that definition
of subjective harm is it lays the gates
wide open to the melians and the
Psychopaths yes yes and and and you're
also touching on two other important
things right so number one unlike
most criminal offenses which require
intent some kind the intent is not on
whether the speaker meant to be hateful
yeah it's not relevant intent is not
relevant right that's terrifying and
also the other thing that's not relevant
is
truth if you speak a true fact that is
interpreted as a hateful fact and has
its effect on somebody well that's not
going to be a defense either right right
so you are essentially one of the the
effects of this kind of legislation is
to say you are not allowed to speak the
truth right because that truth
regardless of intent regardless of
intent regardless of intent and
regardless of historical fact yeah we we
are we are outlawing an
effect yeah right right right absolutely
okay and to expand that even even
further uh with comedy it's interesting
because of course Scotland where some of
the most ridiculous legislation is being
passed is the place which hosts the
biggest arts and Comedy Festival in the
world The edra Fringe right um and uh to
your point about truth well you don't
even have to be saying something true at
this point now they've passed a bill
which means that comedians could be
investigated for jokes they make now
that is a level of Detachment from
Context and reality that is even a level
above simply or someone made a true
comment what if I said something
sarcastically on stage as a comedian and
what's interes is comedy seems to be
being very particularly targeted but
nobody goes to McBeth at the theater and
says oh I went to the theater and then
this guy went crazy and stabbed his
friend no no one says that but with
comedy for some reason the character on
stage is increasingly being perceived as
having the
opinions that he's jokingly saying um
and so that that's another level so what
that's right there's no distinction
between the role and the actor quiet and
and what what's interesting if you
abstract even further from that if
you've watched Game of Thrones the the
scene where you really truly discover
the king Joffrey's gone mad is when he
cuts off the tongue of the jester and
his c yeah and this is this symbolism is
yeah it's perfect it's been used
throughout history to portray uh the
final conversion into tyranny of of a of
a ruler because that's how that's why
there was gestures court is like that
was one of the ways everybody could tell
he was that the the king wasn't a tyrant
right is that he could tolerate his own
gesture his own fool or welcome him or
find him amusing that would be best and
this is something that happened when
Vladimir Putin first came to power in
Russia under Boris yelson there was a
kind of liberalization there was an
opening up of because in the Soviet
Union you didn't make fun of the
political leaders nothing was funny in
the that was true well the jokes that
people told that the kitchen table were
funny but not in public of course um but
under Boris hson there was an opening up
and we had the this amazing TV show
which was the equivalent of the British
spitting image I don't know if you had a
similar thing did you have spit no no no
I know of it though yeah and it was
basically puppets portraying the
different political characters and and
the first thing Vladimir Putin did when
he came to power was to shut that down
so historically throughout literature
and other things if you if you're
looking for symptoms of tyranny the
shutting down of jokes and hum comans
canaries in The coine Comedians and
Automobiles as far as I'm concerned yeah
yeah well they're they're so emblematic
of personal autonomy every Tyrant hates
the automobile so even though they all
want to have one okay so let's delve
into the hate issue a bit more too
because in Canada we have protected
categories of hate right
so you it's a hate crime if
it's I want to make sure I've got this
definition right it's a hate crime if it
can be shown if your utterance be shown
to be discriminate discriminate against
a protected class well yes so so so it's
not merely that you hurt people's
feelings right it's it's corre they have
to hurt them for a particular reason
well it's a discriminatory ter so so we
have these two Realms we have the the
human rights realm and we have the
criminal realm and we we've had hate
speech restrictions in our criminal law
for a good while and they're rarely used
um the the the human
rights provisions are much more
frequently used because because they're
much less serious and much easier to
trigger much easier to complain about
and and they don't go to a court they go
to one of these tribunals right but we
one of the problems is the dovetailing
of this hate speech discriminatory
practice idea along with the the
equality problem that I was just
describing before right so as with any
rule this rule is going to be applied
and interpreted in One Direction and not
the other what I mean by that is if you
go around saying
that um white people are are are hateful
or privileged or colonists or whatever
the case may be that that's pretty
hateful if you say that're all that you
know if you're white you are ex you're
being stereotypical and you're making a
blanket statement about all these people
who are white that's not going to be
entertained as hate speech because
of the way that our equality law has
been interpreted which is and this is
one thing that the Ontario Human Rights
tribunal said fairly recently they said
people who are
white cannot be discriminated against
yeah yeah I really but you're not a
protected group they are not a protected
group some some people some animals are
more equal than others exactly so so so
this this kind of law the hate speech
law is likely to be interpreted in that
way which is oh you can only
utter hate speech against protected
groups if you if you utter hate speech
against those other people who are not
in one of those group there's no hate
speech against the oppressor classes it
doesn't qualify and by the way this
isn't Theory this is so in in Scotland
for example they passed this bill on the
1 of April of course they did recently
uh and uh in the first week of it being
passed there were more reports of hate
speech than there had been in the
previous several years and the reason
was that many many people reported a
speech given by Hamza yussef the first
minister of Scotland in which he was
being openly racist against white people
right um and of course this is this
isn't considered a hate crime and you
know it was the BBC interviewed hamf
where the the interviewer and the he
himself laughed sort of you know almost
gratuitously at oh how how silly uh you
know people would s of course this is
complete nonsense and frankly he said
I'm not aware of anyone who's not on the
far right who would report this as hate
speech it's an absolute case of some
animals are more equal than others and
the law is I'm sure you would agree
written specifically to create that
situation absolutely yeah well not
originally written but now interpreted
and and now this idea has taken well
look once you create the idea of
protected groups and some animals are
inevitably more equal than others your
whether you're feeling stressed or
anxious or simply seeking a moment of
peace and tranqu
the Hallow app has something for you
hallow offers an incredible range of
guided meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God with hallow you can
embark on a journey of exploration
diving into different themes and types
of prayer and meditation from gratitude
to forgiveness each session offers a
unique experience sparking your
curiosity and deepening your spiritual
understanding choose different lengths
of meditation to fit your schedule
whether you have a few minutes or an
hour this flexibility puts you in
control of your own spiritual journey
with its user-friendly interface and
hundreds of guided meditations the
Hallow app has quickly become a go-to
resource for people seeking spiritual
growth and healing you can download the
app for free at hall.com Jordan set
prayer reminders and track your progress
along the way Hall is truly
transformative and will help you connect
with your faith on a deeper level so
what are you waiting for download the
hall app today at hall.com Jordan that's
hall.com Jordan hall.com
Jordan for an exclusive 3-month free
trial of all 10,000 plus prayers and
meditations okay so now we have a
dynamic where in order for there to be
hate there has to
be an oppressor oppressor Dimension
right and so you identify the dimension
it could be sex could be race could be
ethnicity could be gender expression
could be gender identity because those
were added then you have a a situation
where the oppressed end of that
distribution can accuse the oppressor
end of that distribution of hate speech
but not the reverse right so that's
basically the game that's being played
here okay so how does Bill c16 tie into
Bill C63 then well one way is is this as
far as I'm concerned so one of the
things I was very concerned about back
in 2016 was that I looked into gender
expression because that became a new
category of group Hood essentially in
Canada in so far as that was a protected
class so a protected class is a reality
that's now got legal protections that's
pretty damn real as far as the law goes
but I
couldn't distinguish find any
distinction whatsoever between gender
expression and fashion in fact most of
the definitions that I found mostly from
the Ontario Human Rights Commission yes
because a lot of this mess came out of
out of them was the explicit insistence
that gender expression was fashion
because well because gender is and
because gender is nothing but fashion
it's a social construct anyways it's a
role that you play it's a disguise that
you put on it doesn't reflect any deeper
underlying reality well okay what that's
complete nonsense but that's
okay why is that a problem in this case
well if fashion criticism be there's no
limit to what constitutes a hate crime
if fashion criticism
is one of its valid manifestations right
clearly there's almost nothing I could
do to you that would be less harmful
than you know having a good laugh about
your trousers sure but you but one thing
that you're referring to there alluding
to is the weaponization of Human Rights
yes so so if you if you go to an earlier
conception of Human
Rights um you could have described them
as the right not to be abused Us by your
government you know not to be thrown in
jail without due process not to be
censored for this and that uh not to be
tortured those are human rights but
today human rights consist of the rights
of some people in groups to insist that
other people in groups in
groups Embrace their own decisions yes
right or else so if you if so if I
decide that I'm a man and you don't call
me by my pronouns then you are guilty of
a violation of my human rights that is a
that's a very new idea that is not the
where we started with this that's a
weaponization because it means that
human rights are a zero sum game if I
have human rights that means you have
less because I can insist that you
behave in a certain way this this is
about individuals now being able to
determine how other individuals will
will behave it's incredible so now we
have we have another conjunction of of
pathological enabling here that I'd like
to dwell on for a moment so one of the
things we alluded to earlier was the
fact that bill
C63 also opens opens up the door it
facilitates enables and outrate
encourages anonymous anonymous
denunciations now the good thinkers
would say well you want to put as few
barriers in the way of the oppressed
seeking redress for their victimization
as
possible but
that that omits one very important
detail which is
that if you can denounce for zero cost
then you weaponize
denunciation and you put an immense you
put immense you put the entire power of
the state in the hands
of anyone who wants it yeah right and
it's
Anonymous and so to what degree in Bill
C63 do you get to face your accuser
right you don't even know who it is so
they can you can be accused regardless
of your intent regardless of the
factual uh reality of your utterance by
people who you who do not have to
identify themselves or take any
responsibility whatsoever if their
denunciation turns out to be false who
are rewarded for doing so who you do not
get to confront well at that point I
don't see you have a loss system at all
you have rule you don't even have rule
by mop you have rule by the worst
elements of the mop and the worst
elements are going to be those who will
come crawling out of the woodwork like
mad
to weaponize their
resentment by using the the state's
power they now have at their disposal
right and rub their hands and Glee at
ever opportunity to do that there will
be specialists in denunciation in no
time flat okay
so so that goes along with
that well the the the the anonymity of
the informant and the pathology of
the when you divide the world into
oppressed and
oppressor you fail to notice that in the
hypothetically oppressed class there are
going to be those who use that narrative
as a way of justifying their Vengeance
they're not good people who are victims
they are people who are using that story
to get exactly what the hell they want
from you right now or else and certainly
the human rights commissions and Canada
have been weaponized to that degree I
mean in my situation since we'll make it
personal I suppose for a moment anybody
in the world can bring out a complaint
against
me for any reason
right and it's at
the the complaint doesn't have to
proceed that's at
the decision judgment it's the Judgment
of the Ontario College of psychologists
the regulatory board that determines
whether or not that complaint can
proceed right but that's like it's an
entirely political decision but this is
part and partial though of the of those
Trends I was describing earlier which is
to give these administrative bodies the
professional regular being one the human
rights tribunal being another um the the
difference to do as the they think best
and yes you can take as you know you can
you can take them to for review in front
of a court but the court tends to defer
to them and just and and and they have
the Juris Prudence of the Supreme Court
about the charter anyway and so you put
those two things together and it
basically means that these
administrative bodies have have a great
deal of latitude to do basically
whatever they think is right and the
public good yeah right and so that means
you don't have a rule of law that means
Well you certainly don't have any if
you're a think if you're a professional
in canidate and you think your Charter
rights to free speech mean anything
you're sadly deluded because they
certainly don't so right okay so let's
go to next to the next most fun thing
about Bill C63 this is the part where it
moves
from sort of jaw-droppingly
jaw-droppingly incomprehensible to
Absolute theater of the Absurd
I had to reread this section like three
times
yeah before I could believe it was true
I thought I must be misunderstanding
this I had the same experience with Bill
c16 I guess when I read about gender
expression yeah I thought surely this
can't mean fashion because it certainly
looks like it means fashion there's
there's no way it means fashion it's
like nope definitely means fashion and
purposefully so it's like okay fair
enough okay so what have we got on the
pr on the absolutely absurd side of
things okay so this is my understanding
and I'm not a lawyer so maybe you can
help me uh weed out any inaccuracies in
my representation so my understanding is
that I can go to a provincial
magistrate and I can say that I have I
fear that someone I know may commit a
hate crime let's say this year I have I
have good reason the good reason would
be my fear so that would be my
Proclamation that my emotional reaction
to this person's possible misbehavior is
real not even that the threat is real
but that I'm afraid that it might be
real and that magistrate
can act on that y
by well the the penalty laid out in the
bill as far as I can tell
was well if you're the person who is
eliciting the fear
then you get to have an ankle bracelet
on for a year and you can be essentially
confined to your house and the court can
determine who you can talk to and who
you can't talk to and they can also
require you to have your bodily fluids
monitored this is one of the elements of
the bill I didn't understand at all it's
like where the hell did that come from
so they put restrictions on your right
to consume mol for example I suppose
marijuana will probably still be okay as
long as the Liberals are in power but
all right but anything that would in
principle heighten the probability that
you might commit the hate speech and so
and the the
penalties well that's basically that
that's basically that part of the bill
now that doesn't seem that's a pre-crime
it's a pre- crime it's pre- crime now
right now it's not like this is a brand
new idea so there there are already
Provisions in the code that that allow
for pre
crime um Solutions before a crime
happens in some circumstances for some
crimes if a court is satisfied that
there is a threat but what's Happening
Here is they taken that idea and they've
combined it with this speech idea to
create the scenario you're describing
which is right you've got to be kidding
me it it is now possible for a
magistrate to put me under house arrest
because of something that he thinks I
might say
that's where we're at right right so so
the other circumstances you're referring
to I presume would be something like
someone has made repeated threats of
domestic violence that appear credible
correct right that's right right CR a
credible a credible threat of actual
violence right example which which in
itself though constitutes a crime
doesn't it if well if if if you
committed it if you but what if I
threaten you directly with a crime if
you if you make the threat that's a
crime yes correct right okay okay so
that's right so so in that situation the
threat itself is also a crime well it
could be so you you you could have an
actual prosecution for the threat but if
there are circumstances where for some
reason that there hasn't been a threat
but there's still a danger that that the
evidence shows exists maybe because
there have been previous crimes
committed by that individual against
that individual and and the the the the
victim of those crimes is concerned
because it looks like it's going to
happen again there are circumstances
under which the court can can do this
kind of thing but but the combination of
that power with this kind of of of
bastard child of those two laws exactly
yeah very well put yeah okay so I've got
that right that is how this oh yes yeah
and these can also be brought forward
anonymously well well see that so the
the the the anonymous power is um
most noticeable in the bill under the
human rights part so the criminal code
aspect is is is the way it's always done
and sometimes in that situation I'm not
a criminal lawyer but as I understand it
there are circumstances in which
complainants can be can be protected
from exposure to the alleged perpetrator
but the real anonymity problem lies
within the the criminal the the human
rights
tribunal part of the of the of the of
the statute okay okay okay okay but but
so if I can we can step back for a
moment part of
the lesson in this I think is that the
people who have put this together and
are supporting
it have an entirely different
vision of what they think the law is for
and how it's supposed to work like this
seems outrageous to us because we still
have an idea about the old parad like
how this this supposed to how is this
supposed to work and they don't have
that idea anymore this this is a project
to make certain kinds of
behavior
illegitimate like actually
illegitimate and the fact that it
happens to be speech it's no concern of
theirs because it's illegitimate
speaking a true fact if it's going to
have an effect on people is illegitimate
they are changing the paradigm they are
changing the they're reframing the whole
Enterprise my understanding of the law
yeah this is a very fundamental
transformation something surface not
surface it is it it goes to the root of
the way the law works and and and those
of us who are clinging to the old idea
and thinking well this is an aberration
it's an outrageous aberration but it's
an aberration it's not an aberration
anymore it this is becoming the the the
disease that the law is is now subject
to everything is the law is Shifting
beneath our feet Claudine gay wasn't an
aberration universities she's emblematic
of the universities that's right and in
the same way why she was president of
har in the same way that she was
emblematic of the universities this is
becoming emblematic of the law okay so
you speak about this where's the rest of
the
lawyers well I'm not alone yeah I'm not
alone right um our good friend Jared
Brown has been has been speaking out on
this ever since that's two I know and I
have I I I I have I have handfuls of
friends that do the same but it's only a
handful and it's it's pretty small if
you compare bad handful and the numbers
of people who are on this page to the
numbers of
lawyers overall I mean it's a it's a
tiny we slice okay so the I've the same
problem obtains on the psychological end
of things
except maybe there are fewer of us even
yeah there are there are there AR there
AR nearly as many as there ought to be
right and there's almost none whove
stood up against so-called gender
affirming care even though I know
perfectly well that all of them who are
even remotely educated know that every
single bit of that is a lie yes okay so
but the logical qu The Logical suspicion
that might arise in the mind of anybody
watching this is well if it's like you
and two other people on the legal side
and it's Dr Peterson on the on the
clinical side and maybe that's a bit of
an exaggeration but not much
um why do you think you're not the
aberration I mean the problem I've
always had with you fundamentally so I
met Bruce in under very interesting
circumstances he so I went I offered to
go to Queens University right and debate
anyone at the law school about Bill C6
which I thought was a pretty good offer
on my part because I'm not a lawyer and
I thought there must be some lawyer at
the law school jump chance to give me a
good savaging because what the hell do I
know and uh the only one who stepped
forward was Bruce and I don't think I
knew at the beginning of that maybe I
knew I leaned over to you before we
started and introduced myself because we
hadn't met before yeah and I said I just
want you to know I agree with you yeah
right that's how it happened I'm playing
the devil so then so there was one new
step forward and he was playing devil
and I only stepped forward because
nobody else would do right right right
and I wanted to I wanted to give you a
platform to say what you wanted to say
yeah and so I more indication of your
unreliability so I played I played the
part and uh it was good fun but but that
that's where we're at okay so so let's
go back to the same issue
so why the hell aren't the aren't the
more people in the legal community
cognizant of this
danger and willing to speak about it if
it's so fundamental which it seems
fundamental so like what hell what's
going on here it it
so there's lots of reasons but let me
just talk about a
couple the problem is
fundamental and it's been around for a
long time much longer than it seems I
mean still 63 is not a long time c16 is
not a long time
but in the big scheme of things these
Trends have been going on for a long
time so for one example so we have a
huge access to Justice problem meaning
that if you are involved in a dispute of
some kind that the cost involved in
getting a lawyer and then getting access
to a court within a certain period of
time numbered in years almost impossible
unless you're very rich or very poor
access to the courts is very unlikely
now why is that well partly because that
in order to get a resolved you have to
go to a court and what I mean by that is
if we had laws that were
clear right then you wouldn't need to go
to a court because everybody would know
what the law was and you would know what
would happen when you went to a court
every time you go to a court it's a
crapshoot you don't know what's going to
happen so you have to go to the court to
find out what's going to happen which
means we need more courts and more
judges and more time and more lawyers
and it's not clear because of all of the
things I alluded to earlier which is we
don't just have broad principles in our
law we don't have statutes with rules in
them we don't have cases that are
consistent from case to case to case to
case we have one-offs we have
regulations we have guidelines we have
we have we have lots and lots of rules
about everything and you still don't
know what this what the story is because
the laws move over time and they won't
tell you what the law is right now and
you don't know where the law is and who
who's making it the whole things yes and
and so and and this state of things has
existed for quite a while quite a while
it's the it's the ocean in which lawyers
swim they're the fish in the water they
don't they don't see the water it's just
the life that they are used to they
think their job is to make their way
through that ocean for their okay so
that's sort of the run of the mill
lawyers well it's it's not just the r of
the M lawyers it's it's even I mean the
I look we have a lot of good lawyers who
are very skilled at what they do but
they're skilled within a certain system
the system that we have and questioning
that system is not part of the job of
being a lawyer in the normal sense yeah
fair enough right yeah so so it's not
about competence it's about having the
time and energy and
perception and and caring how many
experts in constitutional law the
history of constitutional law are there
in Canada oh oh dozens hundreds so
what's up with them uh well they Lear
largely embrace the the the going Story
the the the the Nar how did that happen
well it has partly to do with legal
education the law schools for the most
part have become yeah captured like all
other institutions by a certain kind of
ideology critical theory social justice
and so on that we know very well right
uh and so really once that's got the
universities that's pretty much game
over a lot of this trouble can be traced
back to the universities that's where
the social justice critical theory stuff
began when it came over from Germany you
know where it started between the two
world wars and then you can trace that
back to Marxism I mean it's a whole long
story and I'm not a sociologist but you
know the story better than I do but um
yeah the universities are a main source
of all the trouble and they've been
they've been graduating generations of
students who have these ideas in their
heads and not not just lawyers but
people of all kinds yeah right who now
occupy the professions and the and the
governments and the public schools and
they certainly pick up the managerial
class exactly so and the managerial
class is our Elite people think that our
Elite are the widely successful
entrepreneurs and there are a few of
those but our our actual Elite is the
managerial class the ones who to to like
getting honked out in Ottawa exactly the
ones who decide decide how Society is
going to
run and and those people are and their
interests though the the interest of
those individual people are in having
this system carry
on and that includes a lot of I was
talking I mentioned you know the problem
I had problem I had with you and problem
I had with you is that you don't make a
very convincing right-wing crackpot well
I mean that like you know you don't fit
the mold cuz the logical thing to do to
assume if someone is standing up against
the consensus yeah generally speaking is
that they're wrong now sometimes they're
right right that's that's that's the
problem right and you know you you've
always struck me as
um let's say suspiciously reasonable
right in the way
that the demagogue types just aren't and
so
and you've already explained why your
view on such things which you did make
evident
and in a really minority fashion I'm
trying to think of other lawyers that I
knew certainly University lawyers there
was no University
lawyers no members of faculties of law
at universities had anything to do with
me in Canada it was you and that was it
you know and you played devil Advocate
which I thought was very funny Once I
figured out what was going on
but okay so why do you think you can see
this why are you willing to see this
and yeah yeah what distinguishes you in
your training your outlook from the
other lawyers who apparently aren't or
won't oh I don't know I can't I can't
tell you that I don't I'm not inside
their heads I don't I don't really no
I've always been suspicious of
government I I was so I I was suspicious
of government
Authority ever since I can remember I
think when I was in public school I
thought how awful to have this person at
the front of the class who's not that
smart and yet has power over me so some
some underlying suspicion of authority
as such sure right right but you still
went off through University to I want
see I wanted to go to law school not
first and foremost to be a lawyer I
wanted to go to law school to find out
what the rules
were so that I could tell people who
wanted to interfere with me what the
rules are I had to back off ah right I
see and what I a different motivation
what I discovered was there are no such
rules there are no such rules as it
turns out that prevents government
authorities from backing off because the
whole system is designed to give them
authority to do that so how did you
manage with that attitude to have a
successful career in Academia in faculty
of
law I mean you've had a very successful
career are you have a very you're you're
actually not cancelled even that's true
yeah so how do you survive at queens or
even Thrive and how did you manage to
have this attitude and also manage a
career in that environment you have to I
think you have to enjoy
the exercise of trying to figure things
out and then point it out even if the
people you're pointing it out to aren't
listening and know that doesn't sound
like very much well yeah but that
usually just gets People cancelled well
not if you do it in a certain way that's
yeah that's what I'm asking what's the
way um you can never make it
personal it's not about that person over
there who thinks X they can think
whatever they want see I'm an actual
libertarian I think it's fine if people
believe what they believe and they want
to do what they want to do I'm totally
fine with that if okay I want to talk
you about that if if their opinion is
diametrically opposed to mine I'm
totally fine with that the only moments
when I have trouble with it is when they
start to step on my toes but as long as
they're not doing that I'm cool I'm cool
right and this is one of the things I
think that distinguishes and you know
what libertarian has become a bad label
because the Libertarians did very very
badly during Co very bad yeah they they
dro the ball horribly and it turns out
they have a lot of strange ideas so I
tend not to use that label anymore but
you understand what I mean but there's a
huge divide between the libertarian
minded people or the Liberals I can use
that word liberals the original
classical liberals and the
conservatives and in a sense um you're
standing as stride the chasm between
these two groups right because the
conservatives have a very a lot of them
have a very clear idea about what they
think is right fair enough people should
have an idea about what they think is
right and the classical liberals know
what they think about the
law and the mistake for my money that
the conservatives make is that they fail
to distinguish between two different
questions the first question which is
entirely legitimate which is what should
people do how should people behave okay
let's hear how you think people should
behave totally fine with that the next
question is not the same question which
is how must people behave there's a
conservative inclination to want to take
their
philosophy and make it into law and to
make people do what they think is right
now right and that's often what made the
conservatives um what would you say uh
yeah yes un undesirable to the more
classic liberal types that was the place
that put those two camps at odds yes and
it's one reason why I think the
progressives today the ones who are now
in power why they carry such an animous
against
conservatives because there is some kind
of a memory there about force of force
when the conservatives were ascendant
here's the kinds of things that you did
you know you you outlawed gay sex you
centered us about pornography and
obscenity and and heresy and Sedition
and you did and you prohibited alcohol
and the conservative record on freedom
is not very
good and so from a Libertarian or a
classical liberal point of view they're
missing the boat and yet the
conservatives and the Liberals the
original Liberals are the two forces
trying to work together to push back on
the W yeah trying to figure out how to
do that but their but their analysis of
what's wrong is completely different
right so if I can put it this way and
and I'm sure you've heard conservatives
say this too so from a classical liberal
point of view the problem that the woke
has created
is too little Freedom you know they have
us under their thumb they want us to do
this and do that use pronouns not not to
say this hate speech y y y okay not
enough
Freedom I've heard lot the conservatives
say no no no the problem under the woke
is too much Freedom MH you have the
freedom to change your gender you have
the freedom to say you're this and not
that you're the freedom to do this that
freedom should not exist so we agree
about that the fact that the woke is a
problem but we disagree about what the
problem is and our solution is
diametrically well that's going to make
us weak too as absolutely okay so let
let me offer two
contradictory responses to that
conundrum
yeah so for a long time I by temperament
have this libertarian twist which
is you can go to hell in a hand basket
your particular way if you so desire and
that's right you know that's within your
baileywick right have add her yeah but
I've rethought that to some degree in
the aftermath of the gender affirming
debacle ah yes right so for a while I
was thinking
with regards to so-called gender
affirming
care um I'm not exactly sure even what
terminology to use
it's it's it's what it's surgical
mutilation essentially yeah hormonal
manipulation and surgical mutilation y
okay should you have the right to do
that to yourself is an adult yes I
thought sure why not knock yourself out
yep but you know I'm starting to wonder
about that there there's two ways you
can approach that one would be well you
might be able to request it but that
doesn't mean the surgeons should be
allowed to provide it oh sure right and
I think they've actually showed their
absolute inability and unwillingness to
police themselves in that regard that's
just clear and then it's also the case
that you don't know the limits to what
people are willing to do to themselves
to stand out and the answer to that is
there are no limits you saw the recent
case in Canada I presume where we have a
diaper fetishist because that's a fun
class of people um who's just pursuing
his own thing after all who wants to
have a Neo vagina uh created somewhere
down below well maintaining his penis
intact and he couldn't find anyone
skillful enough to perform that
particular Act of Butchery on him in
Canada found someone in Texas and then
sued the Canadian government right for
paying for it right and that's the key
and they're going to that's the key
that's right so all right
so at some point I'm sort of thinking no
we're done with all this we're just not
doing sex reassignment I don't care if
you're 90 right it's it there's no
surgeons that have the right to do that
to another person mhm so now and is it a
slippery slope argument well for me it's
sort of for me it's more like I I've
just had enough of this argument I saw
where this went we started with this in
1960 something or rather with the first
sex change operation which I think was a
dubious Enterprise back then and the
cascading consequence of this has been
like the worst medical M practice in
maybe ever MH probably not you know
because ever is a long time and there's
been some dark things done but in terms
of Mass assault on children it's
certainly in the top two but children
are different right right but the but
that's the thing is that you know at
what point does your the perversity of
your desire to go to hell in a hand
basket your own particular Way start to
actually become in and of itself a
social threat okay well
well yeah but let but let's put the kids
aside because the kids are a special
case right and you got then you got the
problem of you know who gets to decide
the parents or the state the easiest
case to resolve and find agreement on
are with adults
so let's ask this question is there
anything that a of an of AG adult full
adult
competent should not be allowed to do to
themselves if they're not imposing upon
other people not coercing them not
interfering with them not taking their
stuff and my answer is nothing I I can't
think of anything now that does not mean
that I think the state should be
involved as in running the Health Care
system I don't think they should be
funding it I don't think they should be
providing Services I mean I we shouldn't
have for my mind we shouldn't have a
public healthare system but so if you
take that away it's like in other words
you should be allowed to go if you can
find a doctor to do this strange thing
that you want done to yourself and the
doctor agrees of his own free will and
you agree of your own free will and
you're willing to pay the doctor as far
as I'm concerned the fact that I think
it's weird and strange and wrong and
harmful I'm not the king so I don't I
don't think my opinion about it has any
relevance to it and that applies to
gender surgery it applies to assisted
suicide it applies to prostitution it
applies to drugs it applies to anything
because it's not my it's not my life
it's their life and I don't want to
impose my there's also the danger there
of deciding who's going to make the
Judgment it's not like it's a risk-free
prohib there's no prohibition that's
risk free right it's just the see the
problem I've H having with that more and
more Bruce is
that there's kind of no end to the
number of monsters who are going to
crawl out from underneath the woodwork
as we've seen that's going to get worse
and so you
know you you say if you can find a
doctor who will do that I mean I I could
I would
respond if I was making the contrary
cases that there are things that if they
were actually doctors they wouldn't do
right right and so we already saw in
Canada I think the removal of two
fingers that was a month ago could be
right because the person had a form of
body dysmorphia and right claimed to be
at suicide risk unless the fingers were
removed well let's take it let's take an
easier one then uh how about how about
assisted suicide now now there are three
there are three models of assisted
suicide the conservative one is no can't
do that it's not not moral can't
outlawed no assistant
suicide the the progressive version is
the one we have in Canada which is it's
publicly funded the government provides
it directs it supports it promotes it
pays for it and it comes with a free
rainbow unicorn kill yourself we'll help
you they encourage it by by by not
giving you timely service on other
things that you really need so that your
life becomes miserable and so the best
way out is to kill yourself that that's
untenable okay I am not advocating that
at all the third version is the
government has nothing to do with it if
you want to kill yourself with the help
of a
doctor that is your business and I might
not
approve but it's got nothing to do with
me well that's kind of where we were
before the assisted suicide La
practically that's kind of where it land
but the conservatives will not put up
with that yeah yeah right so if if I'm
in my old age and I have some kind of
difficulty and I'm not having any fun
anymore I want to be able to kill myself
and I do not want to be under the thumb
of conservatives anymore than I want to
be under the thumb of the woke and this
is the problem that we have between
these two philosophies the the the the
conservatives portray themselves
sometimes as virtue people i' I've
called them that virtue people in the
sense that they put virtue before
freedom and there's something to be said
for that so here's here's the way the
argument goes in order to be truly free
in your own heart or your own mind you
have to be virtuous in your own heart
you have to understand things you have
to have discipline you have to
understand the good or some notion of it
you have to have faith in something in
order to even the purpose of Freedom
exactly you have to have meaning so that
you don't give into based desires and
your animal instincts okay but that's
not about the law and the conservatives
a lot of them anyway say no the law
should make you behave
virtuously yeah virtue enforced virtue
and my answer to that is enforced virtue
is not virtuous it's
obedience in order to be virtuous you
have to decide you have to have free
will to decide between dark and light
and if you don't have the choice then
the fact that you are made to behave in
this way right so part of part of the
like part of the reading of your more
libertarian argument there would be I I
guess part of the reason that I've often
always believed that people should be
allowed to go to hell in a hand basket
in their own particular manner is
because you're going to learn you are
going to learn that's right and that's
then you'll know absolutely and that's
the libertarian version of
responsibility yes right right right
well the state's not going to come in
rescue you this is really your choice
you actually have the knowledge
absolutely there is perhaps and by the
way I come I think as closely from the
As Much from the classical liberal
position as possible on this but I think
there is a test case that's currently
happening on the streets of every major
city in that certainly feels like the
United States right where I don't know
if this is necessarily accurate exactly
but it sort of feels like the
libertarian argument has been taken to
its logical conclusion ignoring elements
of reality so that's why you have
mentally ill people on the streets of
Los Angeles and San Francisco and New
York and elsewhere because well they
they've got to be free right we can't
put them in a mental health hospital
because that and those hospitals used to
be terrible objectively right so getting
people out of the tyranny of that
institution I guess was a good thing but
now they're on the street taking drugs I
and the question is is that freedom
because I don't know that you are fre
when you hooked Define freedom for us
though well I I it feels to me like part
of the conversation around Freedom has
to involve an element of agency and then
the question is do you have agency if
you're so let's say traumatized or so
addicted or whatever that is that's
causing you to effectively be unable to
live a human life right if you're living
in skid R yeah I don't think that's what
Freedom looks like I'm not sure that's
true
what are they learning exactly see
that's that's what sparked my thought
what are they learning uh well I would
suppose that they are learning that the
choices that they made didn't work very
well well and some people do hit bottom
and bounce up yes they do you know I
mean many PE even though we don't know
how to help people recover from
alcoholism really many people do and
they often do after
having their after rubbing their face
along a very rough sidewalk for a very
long period of
time it's certainly not a pleasant form
of
freedom I mean I'm I'm also not
suggesting that you know there's a
simple solution to the problem of having
deinstitutionalized well see this is my
point is I think that um there may just
not there may not be any that the thing
is the question is whether there's a
better solution if you have an IQ of 50
do you have Freedom yes uh sure you do
if if you're if if you are not being
opposed upon by other people or the
state then by definition you have
freedom the fact that you are not able
to exercise it in the same way as the
next guy doesn't mean you're not free it
means you're free to make mistakes
listen free freedom is has good and bad
yes it it enables you to sometimes be
successful and sometimes to fail and
that's part of the package you can't
make it just one way and not other way
CU that's not what it is well there's
another dimension to the conversation
about homelessness and drug addiction
and so on which is I think it's very
difficult to argue that that is
consequence free for the rest of society
so there are we recognize that there are
limits to our freedom when we start to
impact on others and that's a very good
example I think where that trade-off
seems to me to be to be being got wrong
but there is a progressive idea that has
become mainstream and
mainstream especially amongst
conservatives
and that is this that the
state is the savior that is if you want
to solve a problem it has to be the
state to come in to fix it I mean this
is an idea um a professor at hillstate
College um uh put it this way when he
was talking about woodro Wilson who was
the first progressive American President
woodro Wilson he says uh changed the
idea from the government as as servant
MH to government as Savior as in if
we're going to fix our problems it's got
to be the government who does it well
yeah with the with the corresponding
assumption that if there's a problem yes
that's evidence of government inadequacy
right right right right exactly so and
part of the reason we think that so
thoroughly now is that all those other
institutions that used to exist are gone
because the government came in and
pushed them all out right so when you
have people on the streets the only
place to turn to is the state m
and and that doesn't mean it's a good
it's a good call I I think it's a
terrible idea because everything the
government touches goes to rot even
stuff is already rotting I mean part of
the reason those people are there to
start with is because we have an
overwhelming expansive administrative
State and so to suggest that that more
of will more of that is going to fix it
no it's not going to happen no I
certainly wasn't suggesting that I I but
I do think it's an interesting case for
the libertarian argument where it starts
to break down I I used to be Pro
decriminalizing all drugs I think
increasingly that conversation about how
certain things impact your agency is is
important try that with alcohol though
because alcohol alcohol so part of the
rationale claimed for prohibition was
that alcohol is you know can lead to
very bad societal effects which it can
which it can for sure for some people it
can be devastating and yet for a lot of
people not so so are we going to ban
alcohol so as to to avoid the
catastrophic effects on some people no
no no no same with same with
prostitution right now sometimes people
who are in favor again tend to be
conservatives say we know we should ban
prostitution make it illegal because
sometimes prostitution happens without
consent and people get into dangerous
situations and there's sexual assault
and that's
true but that is also true with just
plain old sex where there's no
transaction going on financially it's
just an encounter you get sexual assault
in that situation too are we going to
extrapolate and say well because that
happens just in ordinary sex we're going
to Outlaw that too so as to avoid the
downside scenarios no no if you have two
people who have agency and consent to a
transaction who is going to come in and
say Sor you can't do that not me so so
one of the things that I've been trying
to do my lecture to her that's Germaine
to the point that you raised
about you know if there's a problem it's
indicative of the insufficiency of the
state yeah right sort of as an
aaic presumption is well if that's not
the case then what's the
proper replacement presumption if
there's a
problem who should be doing something
about it I'd like you to tell me what
what you think about this okay because
this isn't exactly a Libertarian freedom
from argument it's it's it's more of a
responsibility argument I'm never sure
where the Libertarians sit on that side
okay
um if you can see a
problem that's your problem like and you
might say well how do you know that and
the answer is something like well it
bothers you mhm so there's a new a
cardinal cardinal new MH who is famous
for
his his defense of the idea of God MH
and he there's a long line of
theological speculation
that one of the ways
that the spirit of the cosmos makes
itself manifest is in the voice of
conscience y it's a very old idea um
goes back to the Prophet Elijah in the
Old Testament Who was the Prophet who
defeated the nature Gods which is very
interesting he replaced the god of
nature which is back at full you know
Force now right with the notion
that the spirit The ancestral god of the
Israelites was the still Small Voice
Within right it was conscience right and
if if you see a problem in the world and
it bothers
you that's a direct indication that you
have something to do it's part of I
would say it's part of the landscape of
meaning that
itself to you it's part of your
responsibility you might say well what
can I do about it which is a perfectly
reasonable objection but the right
response to that is that's your problem
and you might say well why should it be
my problem and one answer to that is
well you need something to do so you
well seriously like because there but
but I think but I think this has a very
simple answer my my simple answer would
be this you know you ask me is that my
responsibility and my answer would be
morally
maybe so legally no no no I wouldn't and
I'm not saying that at all I and that's
all I'm saying all I'm saying is all I'm
saying is legally I am not making a
moral argument here at all about the
drugs or anything else I don't think it
could legally be made your
responsibility it could be made your
obligation well you could be you could
be well if you're talking illegal
obligation that's your responsibility
right fine fine but but this is the
conservative argument about the
prostitution yeah right it's that if you
see a problem that not only should you
do something about it you should make a
law that does something about it yeah if
you see prostitution going on we can't
have that this is a finger wagon stuff
yeah right yeah and it's not effective
it's not effective it's also it's not
even the most it does push people away
from conservatism especially if they're
young and it's actually not the most but
it's also arrogant it's it's arrogant in
this sense it assumes it's a top- down
thing it's like well there's a there's a
few of us the religious hypocrite
there's a few of us up here who
understand what's best for everybody so
we're going to make the rules for which
sounds a lot like the progressives
exactly my point exactly my point the
the progressives and the conservatives
of the silk anyway yeah have a common
idea I mean now the particular virtues
they believe in are completely different
yeah but the but the idea is talk it's
the same yeah yeah if you give me enough
power I'll fix it exactly yeah yeah it's
just that the right people have to have
the power right right whereas your
argument I think one I'm very
sympathetic to is we should have laws
that protect our basic rights and and
let let's get on with it yeah well and
then what I've been attempting to
suggest to people is
that it's in taking up
that mantle of problem personally that
you find the meaning of your life
genuinely that's actually where it lurks
but that's also what protects you
against tyranny because if everyone did
in their local environments what they're
called upon to do there wouldn't be a
lot of unsolved problems lying around
for the tyrants to point to freak out
about and mop up right right so you
there's a there's a real in the in the
Old Testament story in The Exodus story
there's a dynamism between slave and
Tyrant right yeah one needs the other
one produces the other the slaves call
for the Tyrant to emerge the Tyrant
becomes contemptuous of the slaves and
ever more tyrannical it's a dance and
the way that's technically solved in The
Exodus story is it's solved by Moses
brother father-in-law who sees the
Israelites trying to make Moses into a
new Pharaoh because they're all slaves
and whining about and being victims and
you know pining for the Tyranny and he
basically tells them that he tells Moses
to make a hierarchy of distributed
responsibility right to break his people
up into tens and hundreds thousands and
and so forth all the way up to the top
to allocate responsible decision-making
down as far down that hierarchy as
possible right and and to only
adjudicate speaking to Moses those
disputes that can't be adjudicated lower
well why well Jethro says there's two
reasons for that is the first is well
you'll you'll stress yourself out
because no one can take the
responsibility for governing an entire
people so it's it's just not bearable
and you'll turn into a tyrant and that's
not good either but worse and this is
the more subtle point is that if you
alleviate the people of
responsibility yes they'll just stay
slaves yes yeah yes absolutely well I
think that's exactly right is that and
so and that that's a that's a more
responsible libertarian argument it's
like well you need to be able to learn
from your mistakes which is why you
should be able to make them right you
still have that problem of well how big
a mistake till you start taking other
people out you know and that's that's
something I think that's subject to
continual negotiation but I don't think
there is a substitute for a distributed
hierarchy of responsibility and so what
that seems to imply is well as marriage
decays so people abdicate responsibility
for that as the nuclear family decays
because people abdicate responsibility
for that and local community
organizations and the
church all of that abdicated
responsibility is is vacuumed up by the
state yes right yes yeah exactly right
and in fact it's I would say that the
state is largely responsible for the
disintegration of those things in the
first place yeah right so you cause the
problem and then you vacuum up what's
left of it afterwards yeah yeah well
there's a I wrote a paper with Jonathan
Paso for the arkc on uh on the symbolism
of the whr of Babylon and the Scarlet
State Scarlet beast in in Revelation
uhuh and so it's an image of the end
times right and the end times has two
archetypal elements so the Scarlet Beast
is a blood colored Beast it's the blood
colored beast of the state basically
multiple heads so it's a degenerate
State because a unified state has one
head like seven heads all male right
pointing in different directions right
so it's a it's a degenerate
patriarchy all right and on the back of
the
Scarlet Beast which is the
degenerate masculine spirit is the
of Babylon which is the degenerate
feminine spirit because you know no one
sex doesn't go wrong without the other
sex going wrong what happens well in in
the degenerate
State female sexuality is
commodified right right right and so you
get that dance now right right right
yeah it's but it's worse you see cuz the
story has a particular ending the Beast
kills the prostitute so what the
implication there is that the state will
as it disintegrates it offers more and
more hedonistic gratification as
enticement but it ends up destroying all
gratification whatsoever because it
can't sustain the promises the promises
that it offers which brings us all the
way back to there's no bread that's
right exactly and it brings us all the
way back to the beginning because as all
of these institutions that traditionally
used to regulate relationships between
human beings crumble we need more and
more laws whereas in the past if Barry
said something offensive well Barry's a
bit of a dick you know what what's for
dinner now it's well Barry's a bit of a
dick we got to legislate cuz we can't
have phone the hate crime unit that's
right because we are not self-regulating
all of those relationships and now we
need St to come in we need we need
Departments of social work to come and
be the worst possible foster parents
inable that's right all right gentlemen
we should probably draw this to a halt
for those of you watching and listening
most of you know that I generally
continue these interviews for another
half an hour on the daily wi plus side
of things and I think what we might turn
to in this particular occasion is
Solutions potential Solutions which we
didn't have an opportunity to
discuss concentrating more on laying out
the apocalyptic landscape so to speak
particularly in Canada but in a manner
that's
like illustrative of what's happening I
would say generally in the west so thank
you DR party very much pleasure
participating in that Constantine all
those of you who are watching and
listening be your time and attention is
much appreciated to the Daily wire plus
people for making this possible that's
also much appreciated film crew here in
Dallas thank you for your help guys that
went very well and uh drop over to the
Daily R plus side if you want to see
this continue
bye-bye
[Music]